# Executive Summary

The diagnosis of blood-based diseases often involves identifying and characterizing patient blood samples. Current process involves cell sorters but automated methods to detect and classify blood cell subtypes can have important medical applications. For this project my goal is to build an image classifier using Tensorflow to recognize the different cell types and to examine the challenges and the feasibility of building such a model. I hope to show that image classification models might one day be used in the field producing results very fast and inexpensively without having to go through additional manual steps or following additional protocols.

# Project Objectives, Challenges and Scope

To build this Blood Cell classification model, I plan to use the Blood Cell Images dataset available from Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/paultimothymooney/blood-cells). This dataset contains 12,500 augmented images of blood cells (JPEG) with accompanying cell type labels (CSV) and there are approximately 3,000 images for each of 4 different cell types grouped into 4 different folders (according to cell type). These cell types are: Eosinophil, Neutrophil, Lymphocyte, Monocyte.

Image classification problems require large number of images for the training process. In the absence of the number of images needed for model training, image augmentation and transfer learning techniques are used to address the issue. 

* The Blood Cell Images dataset contains only 410 original images which were later augmented and a larger dataset of 12000 images was created. Therefore, additional augmentation of images will not be performed. 
* For this project, I plan to limit the scope to building a relatively simple Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model, training and evaluating the model. Transfer learning techniques from other pre-trained image models will also not be utilized.

Reading and processing 12000 images has its own challenges. Trying to read all the images at once, converting them to tensors would require very large amounts of memory and it would not be practical. In this project my goal is to address this issue by reading a batch of images that matches the batch input for model training and managing memory requirements more efficiently.

# Model Success Metrics

Production ready models would need to match or exceed the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of the current techniques. And to achieve this level of performance metrics would probably require very deep models and/or transfer learning. Our goal is not to build a production ready model but to examine the steps and understand the challenge of building such a model, so we will not try to match or exceed the accuracy of the current techniques.

However, we will consider our model a success if:

* The overall accuracy is 90% or better
* True Positive Rate and True Negative Rates are above 80% for each of the Blood Type class

# Setup and Running the Project

## Environment

The project is developed using the following environment:
* Windows 10 platform running
  + Python 3.6.2 |Anaconda custom (64-bit)
  + PyCharm Community 2018.1
* Referencing packages
  + tensorflow 1.8.0
  + matplotlib 2.2.2
  + numpy 1.14.5
  + pandas 0.23.1
  + scikit-learn 0.19.1
  + scipy 1.1.0

Full list of all the required packages are listed in the **requirement.txt** file.

## Running the Project

### Step 1

Before you run the `train.py` file under the **FinalProject** folder, make sure you clear or delete the **model** directory and let the program create a new one. You can run this from your IDE or from the command line.
If running from the command line please make sure you chnage your current directory to FinalProject folder before you type the following command:
```{python}
python train.py
```
The `train.py` will first check to see if the required folders for the cell images exists under **data/images** folder. If the folders do not exist, the program will automatically uncompress the `.tar.gz` files which are located inside the same directory.

Once the sub folders containing the images are there, the program will train and test the model and will output the loss and accuracy results to console until the end of the last epoch. At the end of last epoch, you will also see a plot of the loss function values over the epochs.

### Step 2

Once the training is completed you can run the `eval.py` to evaluate the model and examine the Confusion Matrix generated by the program's output to see how our model did predicting different classes. If you have skipped the first step you can still run the eval.py since there is a saved model in the model directory for the program to restore and use! 

The program will also output the model's Precision, Recall and the F1-scores as well as the overall accuracy.

If running from the command line please make sure you change your current directory to FinalProject folder before you type the following command:
```{python}
python eval.py
```

### Step 3

During training and testing, the program will also create a `model` directory where model graph and parameter summaries are saved to be viewed by Tensorboard. There is already one saved if you have skipped the first step! 

From the command line you can type the following to to run the tensorboard and visualize the results:
```python
tensorboard --logdir "./model"
```
You will be directed by Tensorboard to open your browser and go to localhost:6006 or <<computer_name>>:6006 to view the graph and the summaries!

